# Filtered NCBI-nt in FASTA format

Filtered NT dataset is generated by excluding sequences from the whole
nt file provided by NCBI, based on whether they have unwanted taxonomy 
names or any child taxonomy name of these unwanted ones. These unwanted 
taxonomy names are listed in the black list generated by two steps: 
(1) Getting all taxonomy names which contain the strings listed 
below (Step 3); (2) Getting all possible child taxonomy names of each 
of the taxonomy names from (1). For example, "other sequences" 
(taxId: 28384) is excluded with all its child taxonomy names including 
"artificial sequence", "vector", "synthetic", and so on.

We have chosen to apply the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0
Unsupported License to this version of the software.



|Version | Downloadable Files | File Size | Release Notes|NCBI Download Date|
|--------|--------------------|-----------|--------------|------------------|
|Vesrion 6.0| [Filtered NT v6.0](https://hive.biochemistry.gwu.edu/prd/filterednt//content/filtered_nt_July_2018.fasta)| 168G|[Release Notes v6](https://hive.biochemistry.gwu.edu/filterednt/releasenotesv6)|July 2018|
|Version 5.0|[Filtered_NT v5.0](https://hive.biochemistry.gwu.edu/prd//filterednt/content/Filtered_NTv5.0.fasta)|131G|[Release Notes v5.0](https://hive.biochemistry.gwu.edu/filterednt/releasenotesv5)|May 2017|
|Version 4.0| [Filtered NT v4.0](https://hive.biochemistry.gwu.edu/prd//filterednt/content/Filtered_NTv4.0.fasta)|110G|[Release Notes v4.0](https://hive.biochemistry.gwu.edu/filterednt/releasenotesv4)|July 2016|




# Summary of the protocol

************************************************************************
## Step 1. Download the whole nt file
************************************************************************
downloaded from: ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/FASTA/
version: 5/21/2017
command:
    wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/FASTA/nt.gz
    gunzip nt.gz (42,439,338 rows)

************************************************************************
## Step 2. Download the taxonomy list 
************************************************************************
downloaded from: ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/
version: 5/21/2017; 5/30/2017
command:
	wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/accession2taxid/*.gz
	gunzip *.gz
	wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz
	gunzip taxdump.tar.gz |tar -xvf
location: /data/projects/targetdbs/downloads/


************************************************************************
## Step 3. Generate black list
************************************************************************
protocol: unwanted taxonomy names (scientific names) from names.dmp and
		all child taxonomy names of them, include:
		['unclassified','unidentified','uncultured', \
			 'unspecified','unknown','phage','vector']
		['environmental sample','artificial sequence','other sequence']

	  There are two steps for generating the black list, first is to
		get all taxonomy names with the strings above, and then
		to get all child taxonomy names of them.

script: /projects/targetdbs/scripts/get-parent-taxid-of-blacklist.py
	/projects/targetdbs/scripts/get-child-taxid-of-blacklist.py

output: /data/projects/targetdbs/generated/blacklist-taxId.1.csv
	/data/projects/targetdbs/generated/blacklist-taxId.2.csv

	After generating blacklist-taxId.2.txt, use command line 
	"sort -u" to delete duplicated records, and store them into:
	/data/projects/targetdbs/generated/blacklist-taxId.unique.csv

QC script: /projects/targetdbs/scripts/compare-old-new-blacklist.py
		Compare the newly generated with the older version.


************************************************************************
## Step 4. Check the completion of taxonomy list (QC)
************************************************************************
protocol: First check if all seqAcs in nt file have taxIds from 
	nucl_gb.accession2taxid file, and the ones do not have taxIds
	are checked in all other ac2taxid files.
script: /projects/targetdbs/scripts/check-ac2taxid-completion-step1.py
	/projects/targetdbs/scripts/check-ac2taxid-completion-step2.py
	/projects/targetdbs/scripts/check-ac2taxid-completion-step3.py
output: /data/projects/targetdbs/generated/logfile.step1.txt
	/data/projects/targetdbs/generated/logfile.step2.txt
	/data/projects/targetdbs/generated/logfile.step3.txt

This step needs a lot of memory. Suggest to run on large machine. 
        123 records of PDB accessions have extra characters, fixed 
	that in step3.py.
	However, 28 records are not in the files, search taxIds
	manually for them (/data/projects/targetdbs/generated/ \
	logfile.step3.manually.added.txt).


************************************************************************
## Step 5. Get the seqAc-taxonomy list
************************************************************************
protocol: Exclude those taxIds in the blacklist. And first get all 
	seqAc-taxIds from nucl_gb.accession2taxid, and all of other
	ac2taxid files from both version 05/21/2017 and 05/30/2017.
script: /projects/targetdbs/scripts/get-seqac2taxid.py
output: /data/projects/targetdbs/generated/logfile.ac2taxid.list.txt
QC step: All seqAcs in nt files are mapped to at least one taxId. The
	number of seqAcs in the list matches the one in nt file.
	SeqAcs with multiple taxIds are listed in:
	/data/projects/targetdbs/generated/seqAc-with-multiple-taxids.txt


************************************************************************
## Step 6. Filtering nt file
************************************************************************
protocol: Remember to add those manually added ac2taxids.
script: /projects/targetdbs/scripts/filter-nt.py
output: /data/projects/targetdbs/generated/filtered_nt_Jun06-2017.fasta
QC script: /projects/targetdbs/scripts/check-removed-seqacs-count.py
